import {Post} from '../../Post';
export default Post;
export let title = "docgen.mk"

There are a lot of static site generators out there and there is really no
reason to write yet another one. But I did it — meet [docgen.mk][1].

Docgen.mk is designed to be a really simple piece of software — I will show a
usage example on a real world case — this blog. You can find the full source
code in the GitHub [repo][2] by the way.

## Layout

The thing you should start first is layout:

    braintrace.ru
    ├── Makefile
    ├── build
    ├── docgen
    │   ├── bin
    │   ├── docgen.core.mk
    │   ├── docgen.jinja2.mk
    │   ├── docgen.markdown.mk
    │   ├── docgen.prelude.mk
    ├── settings.yaml
    ├── src
    │   ├── css
    │   ├── index.html.jinja2
    │   ├── posts
    │   ├── rss.xml.jinja2
    └── templates
        ├── base.jinja2
        └── post.jinja2

Here you can find:

  * `Makefile` — this is a description of the build process, don't worry you
    don't need to write any complex Makefile stuff if you don't want to —
    docgen.mk works almost out of the box there (see below).

  * `build` — you build results will be store here, usually you want to `rsync`
    this directory to remote machine where you site hosted.

  * `docgen` — cloned repo of docgen.mk.

  * `settings.yaml` — YAML file with site metadata such as author, site name and
    so on (see below).

  * `src` — site sources, such as static pages, blog posts and static assets
    (css, javascript, images).

  * `templates` — templates for pages, in this particular case I use
    [Jinja2][3], but docgen.mk designed to be agnostic to that sort of things.

[1]: https://github.com/andreypopp/docgen.mk
[2]: https://github.com/andreypopp/braintrace.ru
[3]: http://jinja2.pocoo.org

## Makefile

Now the main part of the process, the `Makefile`:

    # settings
    SRC         := src
    BUILD       := build
    BIN         := docgen/bin
    TEMPLATE_md := templates/post.jinja2

    # docgen
    include ./docgen/docgen.prelude.mk
    include ./docgen/docgen.markdown.mk
    include ./docgen/docgen.jinja2.mk
    include ./docgen/docgen.core.mk

    # helpers
    preview:
      @(cd build; python -m SimpleHTTPServer)

You tell where your sources is and your results should be stored via `SRC` and
`BUILD` variables and set where docgen binaries located via `BIN`. Ah, you also
would want to set `TEMPLATE_md` variable to template you want to use for
rendered markdown files.

Then you need to include `docgen.mk` macros — in this case I use Jinja2
templates for pages and markdown for blog posts so I've included
`docgen.jinja2.mk` and `docgen.markdown.mk` plugins besides required
`docgen.prelude.mk` (this one is required to be included first) and
`docgen.core.mk` (this one is required to be included last).

## Building site

That's basically all you need to generate your site from sources, just issue
`make` command:

    % make

and your built site stored in `build` directory!

## How it works

By default, with only `docgen.prelude.mk` and `docgen.core.mk` included, it just
copies files from `src` to `build` dir — this works well for css, images and
other static assets but not for pages you want to apply to templates or blog
posts stored in markdown.

When you include `docgen.jinja2.mk` macros it instructs docgen to process files
ending with `.jinja2` suffix differently — by rendering them using Jinja2
templating engine — the result then stored inside `build` directory with dropped
suffix so `src/index.html.jinja2` becomes `build/index.html` and so on. Other
plugins like `docgen.markdown.mk` work effectively the same.

## Metadata extraction

Sometimes you need to render pages which should be aware of all blog posts
found in your blog or something like that — *a list of recent blog posts*, *a
gallery of all your photos uploaded*. For that reason plugins are allowed to 
have an additional build phase for *metadata extraction*.

For example `docgen.markdown.mk` allows `*.md` files to have YAML document as a
header (separated by empty line from document itself):

    title: A blog post
    tags: blog, post
    published: 2027/09/01

    Hello, this is a blog post...

During *metadata extraction* phase only those YAML "headers" are processed and
aggregated into single file `build/.metadata.yaml` which then can be used by
Jinja2 templates or by other plugins.

## Parallelism

And yes — as a free bonus for using `make` you get a parallel builds our of the
box:

    % make -j16

will build your site forking 16 processes in parallel ;-).
